good evening everyone lazla montgomery
here with the concluding episode of our
china history podcast general survey of
xinjiang history
covering the centuries from bce to the
modern age
this one may go into extra innings and i
hope you
won't hold me in too much contempt if
that happens
hey once in a while i'll put this at the
beginning if you'd like to show some
love
for the chp and join my growing family
of elite
chp supporters go to patreon.com
china history podcast three frog skins
is all i ask early access to new
episodes
racy stories from my life and career
that would get me hustled off this rss
feed in no time at all
and a whole lot more patreon not your
thing
you can contribute to this worthy cause
at paypal dot me
slash china history podcast no fuss no
muss
thanks for considering that details at
the show notes
at the website at tcup.media
well we're going to take this up to 1949
and we may have to fly higher than felix
baumgartner once again
to take it all in but sometimes the big
picture offers you
a sufficient enough understanding to
digest a lot of what you
hear and read last time we left off in
1885 with the death of general
georgetown
thanks to his efforts and achievements
xinjiang was annexed and turned into a
province of
china authority had been re-established
on paper anyway same old problem
without the benefit of advanced
technologies xinjiang
was too big too diverse and too
spread out to control and life went on
and all the many locales and their
respective histories continued to be
made but there wasn't that much of a
nexus
between the locals and with the china
authorities
all the qing dynasty rulers wanted was
for xinjiang to be peacefully integrated
with china proper
and that the place could generate enough
taxes and revenue sufficient enough so
that this new acquisition for the
empire would not be so reliant on the
central government
the dynasty didn't survive to see either
of those things
and the military out there well even if
they doubled or
tripled the number of forces it was like
it was like the lapd
trying to enforce law and order in the
whole state of california
they could never send enough troops out
there to make a difference outside
government strongholds
and though throughout this series i
didn't delve too deeply into the details
but in every single location in xinjiang
we've mentioned since part one
these places all had a couple thousand
complicated years of history blowing in
their sails that made
occupation and assimilation a perpetual
unfulfilled pipe dream the turkic people
throughout the province weren't going to
embrace chinese ways any more than the
chinese
manchus or mongols were going to embrace
theirs
and each successive ruler of the various
governments who came and
took the place over and tried to
rearrange the furniture and give the
place a total makeover
they always walked on these
hot coals of centuries upon centuries of
tradition and deeply rooted thinking
the han settlers who came to xinjiang
flush with incentives
well they came and most didn't stay long
and these han settlers stuck together
and mostly all congregated in the
northern part of xinjiang
tsungaria yeah
this whole matter of settling this new
province was going to be a real
long-term project
into the 1890s and then the 10-year
countdown to the end of the qing dynasty
you all remember those years from that
warlord series and from other past
episodes the box of rebellion debacle
and shirkai warlordism bay young
government
southern government crushing indemnities
any hopes the authorities in xinjiang
had of getting funds for the central
government
forget about it xinjiang was going to
have to wait again
the 1887 census of xinjiang pegged the
population at
one million two hundred and thirty eight
thousand five hundred eighty-three
with ninety-one percent being uyghurs
and five percent han chinese
in 1907 1908 that figure rose to
one million six hundred fifty thousand
to two million
and today the population of xinjiang is
about
25 million with 45 percent weaker and
about 40 percent han
after jojong tang's reconquest life went
on in xinjiang
and as the place had always been going
back to the beginning
xinjiang continued in its role as an
asian crossroads where goods were traded
back and forth
between china and on to
every nook and cranny in the central
asian markets
these years were china's closest
equivalent to our post-civil war wild
west days
right before during and after yaakov beg
by 1904 the trans-siberian railway was
finished and then in 1929 1930 the
turkistan siberian railway was completed
and following this came all the changes
that usually come with the deal
this was a golden age of russian trading
and involvement in xinjiang
they completely dominated xinjiang trade
and
the soviet demand for xinjiang cotton
was insatiable
the treaty of saint petersburg the one
signed in 1881
put russian traders in the driver's seat
in xinjiang
in return for handing back the ili
valley
russia got to open up a slew of consular
offices
throughout western china and they got to
enjoy duty-free trade
in mongolia and xinjiang they didn't
have to pay the taxes that the chinese
traders got stuck
paying and in many cases the russians
could
sell to the locals without any
competition made in russia was
cheaper than made in china these were
the most exciting of times and very well
documented by travelers officials and
diplomats of that time
sven hedin for example and his
masterpiece through asia
that and many other travelers tales came
out of this
age this was also the time of sir george
mccartney
and francis young husband and that 1890
mission to
chinese turkistan kashgar was written
about copiously and no shortage of
intrepid travelers from those days of
adventure would deny
kashgar was the place to be and xinjiang
was spelled s-i-n-k-i-a-n-g
in all those old stories and besides
these
vacationers to exotic locales
seeing that spelling also evokes that
age when all the greatest
adventurers and archaeologists were
doing their exploring or plundering of
artifacts depending on your viewpoint
in the silk road towns of ancient times
and with the modern world rushing in on
them like it was
most of the turkic inhabitants of
xinjiang were like a dare in the
headlights
only wishing to maintain their
traditional lifestyle that contained all
that
they really needed in life their mosques
their families their leisure activities
and the bazaars
this daily rhythm of life wasn't so bad
the matter of xinjiang now belonging to
the qing empire
oh for most of these sedentary
traditional
muslim xinjiang inhabitants well they
never rubbed up against them before
what happened in beijing up till now had
never had any
direct impact on their daily world
well i don't mean to jump ahead or
anything but as we all know
1911 the qing dynasty fell
and when the end came xinjiang wasn't
even close to being self-sufficient and
was still on the dole to the central
government
and when the central government went and
also went the welfare check so to speak
so xinjiang was in for a very rough and
frightful 38 years
and then some if you recall from the
10-part warlord series the xinjing
the new army that later became the
baeyong army
well they sent troops out west to go
take over xinjiang in the name of the
provisional government
and this army later got re-branded is
the xinjiang army
and they had bases in urumqi and ili it
would take till january 8
1912 before the last of the qing
holdouts and royalists can be swatted
down and the
provisional government in xinjiang was
established in yili
and then the defeated pro-ching
restorationists
ran and tried one last-ditch effort to
set up a rival government in urumqi
and the two contenders one added
immediately with neither side and their
respective allies being able to
vanquish the other now one of the
players to emerge in xinjiang during
this time
was the gela hui the brothers and elder
society
they were anti-ching in their makeup and
had thoroughly infiltrated
army and it was rumored general himself
was a
major guy in this secret organization
like almost all of these 19th century
secret societies the galahue
is neck deep in its own lore after the
re-conquest of xinjiang by general tsor
the gula hue ended up running organized
crime and got in on the ground floor the
opium business out there
this secret society was mostly made up
of
han chinese but had a smattering of
locals and former soldiers
as well their power base was mainly in
the south and they cemented their
ties with the ely provisional government
by carrying out all kinds of dirty work
for them
most well-known perhaps was the
assassination of many former qing
officials across
11 cities this brothers and elder
society like these organizations often
do
got cozy with the provisional government
and elie and the two enjoyed an unholy
symbiotic relationship
the republic of china government led by
the illustrious guamindong
they tried their darndest to achieve
what the qing dynasty had failed to do
to establish control out there tame all
the ethnic minorities and
try to establish some semblance of amity
and guide china's newest province
to a new and productive future four men
will reign
supreme in xinjiang over the next 35
years
we'll quickly look at each one of them
and what the big picture in xinjiang was
during this time
as we all know for the first four years
in the life of the republic of
china the most powerful man in all the
land was yen shirkai
he had placed his allies in all the most
important regions of
china to represent the collective best
interests of this
beyond clique of military strongmen
then of course 1916 yen shirkai went
down in flames with his failed bid to
restore the monarchy
and it's every warlord for themselves
for the next dozen years or so
every province had their own warlord and
xinjiang
was no exception this was yongsan
he held down the fort in xinjiang from
1912 to
eight yen shirkai had made yang his man
in xinjiang when he appointed him
civilian and military governor of the
province
yang also owed a portion of his rise to
the top to the brothers and elder
society
they had carried water too for yongsan
xing to help him get elected
as far as the central government was
concerned like the other warlords
yang paid lip service to the central
authority
like any of the warlords of the time he
did whatever
he wanted and that included signing his
own treaties with
foreign powers and as soon as he was
firmly in control of all the buttons and
levers that controlled xinjiang
he turned on the kalauhui the brothers
and elder society
giving them a similar fate as the
knights templars got on october 13 1307
yang turned on them and after that bit
of nasty business was taken care of
it was the turn of the provisional elite
government yang zangshin
didn't take any chances with them either
they were silenced and he became the
sole
voice that mattered in the province
used a whole number of methods he
learned from the soviets about how to
seize and hold on to power his reign
as the ruler of xinjiang could be summed
up in three words
corrupt autocratic and backward
he adopted an aggressive strategy to
isolate
xinjiang from china and russia any
infrastructure projects that involved
linking up with lance outside of
xinjiang
he wouldn't get behind them he was a
died in the wall isolationist
and the whole scene going on in beijing
shanghai tianjin and all the other
intellectual centers in china
he made sure none of that stuff got
passed around xinjiang
he didn't want anyone getting any ideas
in their head
he suppressed uyghur education we'll get
to that in a minute but
educated turkic citizens and all
intellectuals of xinjiang were
particularly targeted by yangtzeng shin
as any dictator would do as far as this
group was concerned he took
every measure to prevent them from
getting their hands on all that
dangerous literature wafting in from
all the rising pan-turkic centers beyond
xinjiang's borders
stretching all the way to istanbul where
kemal ataturk was
then serving as the country's first
president
you know depending on which history book
you read the years that
yanseng ran xinjiang get mixed reviews
despite his ruthlessness and
determination to keep xinjiang in the
19th century
society was by and large peaceful
there were notorious atrocities carried
out by the way general mafusing
yang put him in charge of kashgar where
things were particularly
unruly and so horrific and outrageous
were the atrocities committed by
mafusing
against the populace there well it
caused
huge social unrest and yang had to send
someone to go bump him off in 1924.
here's a famous post-execution photo of
mafuching
and tied to a cross crucifixion style
floating around the web
live by the sword die by the sword with
xinjiang being closer to mongolia and
the soviet union than it was to china
per se
well relations with these two places
dominated in matters of
trade and border relations even though
he wasn't the head of a sovereign nation
yang zangxin as i said he cut his own
deals with russia and signed his own
treaties
didn't give the republican government
any face
and remember thanks to that treaty of
saint petersburg
russians had all those tax-free
privileges and the chinese merchants
couldn't compete with them
and on july 7th 1928
12 years to the day before ringo was
born in the dingle
yongsan shin was assassinated by a rival
at a dinner party no less
and waiting in the wings to take over
was yang's number two guy
jin shuren like with his predecessor jin
shuran had the government's backing but
in return for making him
you know provisional chairman and
commander-in-chief he can say
they got nothing in return jin had grown
up in gansu and was very familiar with
muslim unrest out that way until his
dying day
jin shuren's policies were always
anti-muslim no matter wigar or hui
with the newborn government and china
still trying to sort itself out
the soviets were more than happy to go
into xinjiang and make deals with the
various powers
circulating in the area they had signed
a nice
juicy treaty with jin shuren that in
in exchange for arms and weapons
and more or less gave the whole store
away
jean shuran had all of yangzangshin's
faults
plus a few of his own his time in charge
of xinjiang was remembered as one in
which the people were
raped and pillaged for maximum personal
gain
and during his six-year period of rule
there he managed to alienate
and infuriate just about everyone
at the dawn of the 1930s xinjiang was
again
wrecked with rebellion and protest
against all the repression
1931 was a red letter year in xinjiang
began with a bang
the hami rebellion also known as the
kumal rebellion
do you remember back in part 10 i think
it was how the muslim authorities in and
around hami
threw their lot in with the qing
government rather than endure the
policies of the tsungars who were
tibetan buddhists now ever since then
for almost a couple centuries
this portion of eastern mo xinjiang
bordering mongolia and gansu
was semi-autonomous and a series of cons
ruled this kumal khanate with the
consent of the qing ruler
well jin shuren abolished it after the
latest khan
had passed away and this muslim land
that had enjoyed
a relative calm compared to the rest of
the province
rose up in rebellion and jeanne shuran
sent
an overwhelming force there to put down
this popular uprising
and with the populace there enduring all
this violence and
ferocity yeah things were never the same
again
the unrest spread first throughout
turpan and by the end of 1932 and into
1933 to other parts of xinjiang
and all this muslim unrest that would
define the rest of our story here
eventually sunk
jin shuran who fled xinjiang following a
coup
in april 1933 the biggest player who
came in
and put their whole fist into that pie
and
sort of took over xinjiang without
having to actually take the place over
where the soviets nobody knew how to
stir up the you-know-what like them
not until much later under mao will the
soviets have to
stop their unfettered harvesting of all
kinds of
mineral riches and other traded
manufacturers of xinjiang
and this is where the third ruler of
xinjiang enters our picture
we had yang zhang shin jin shuren
and now came the new commander for
bandit suppression for the eastern
circuit
shirts high he climbed his way to this
position after first
serving in chiang too lane's manchurian
army and then
for chiang kai-shek in the northern
expedition he was working for jin shuran
when the nationalists
yank jin out of xinjiang so after the
mukden
incident on 9 18 31 the soviets became
more interested in xinjiang than
ever there was a genuine concern out
there that
as japan became more assertive in
manchuria
well it was only a matter of time before
they set their sights on xinjiang
a place they were already sniffing
around
the soviets didn't establish a manchukuo
or anything there but
they took advantage of every single
benefit they chanced upon and came
pretty darn close
so besides being the nationalist
government's third man in xinjiang
who paid them no heed shung shirt's eye
was more importantly
the soviets man in xinjiang jiang
kai-shek thought shang shirts high
worked for him
but like his two predecessors
shung shirt's eye worked for himself but
in the choice of the soviets or the kmt
yeah shang went with stalin when he
needed soviet troops to help quell riots
they were more than happy to help him
out and throughout this period
even though the fledgling republic of
china government had no power or control
in xinjiang
they never gave up their claim to this
land
the top leadership remained resolute in
this matter
unfortunately for the kmt government it
will be mao zedong who will benefit from
this steadfastness
not them shirts high if you could say
one thing about them
was a soviet stooge for their support
which came in the form of loans to
develop xinjiang and of course
weapons the soves continued to enjoy
unobstructive access to xinjiang's
bounty and they didn't even know about
the oil yet
stalin was giddy with excitement at
having all this access to xinjiang
advisors and engineers flooded in just
like they would again in the 1950s
and as china was left to sort out their
political problems
russia got to gorge themselves for a
while longer
besides everything that i've mentioned
so far with chinese and russian
relations and xinjiang
there was also something else going on
called the first
eastern turkistan republic there were
two the first one lasted
1933 1934 it was also known as the
islamic republic of eastern turkistan
all the turkic blood spilled during the
time of yaakov beg
began to coagulate here in the form of
this
uprising and declaration of this new
state based
in jakob beg's former stronghold of
kashgar
from past chb episodes we're all
familiar with the may 4th movement and
everything that was happening with
modern
learning and the thousands and thousands
of chinese students who
fanned out across the great universities
in the west
and in japan bringing all these new
ideas and experiences back to china
well over in xinjiang amongst the
uyghurs there a similar thing was also
happening
this was known as the jadist movement
and these jadids
who had traveled the islamic world and
had studied in turkey and other places
in central asia
they brought these ideas of pan-islamic
pan-turkism back to xinjiang and all the
vernacular
turkic writings had the same impact on
xinjiang intellectuals
as much as what chinese were getting out
of the periodicals such as
new youth magazine and this movement
really took hold
especially with the more educated and
worldly uyghur elites of the 1910
1920s enlightenment they had several
legitimate gripes with the government
going
back to the qing mainly the uyghurs
resented that
whatever economic improvements that
happened in xinjiang
well they never became the beneficiaries
they were always getting the short end
of the stick
and the leaders of this movement were
able to
articulate this frustration felt by many
and this pan-turkism really began to
take off
starting in central asia and spreading
to xinjiang
and all of this ran concurrently
with the whole may 4th movement in china
predictably the soviets were dead set
against all these ideas of pan-turkism
and didn't want to
hear any talk that called for
self-determination
and whatever extremism that percolated
in and around kashgar where the east
turkestan republic was based
well they didn't want any of that
creeping across the border into their
perfect little soviet central asian
world
with inspiration from the soviets
shangshitsai had gone to the trouble to
assign
official labels to all of the 14 diverse
ethnicities who bedded down each night
under the xinjiang moon this is where
uyghurs
officially on paper became uyghurs
the uyghur identity well at first been
applied to those
turkic people from xinjiang who had
emigrated to the soviet union in 1921
among other benefits to the state and
having everyone all sorted out for
census purposes
it also made them easier to control
manipulate and most important of all
to keep them divided the last thing the
soviets or the chinese wanted
was for another bumin kagan to emerge
from these people to unite them all and
lead them
among the many ethnicities of xinjiang
were the same ones we've been hearing
over the past several episodes
uyghur kazakh tajik kyrgyz
uzbek han mongol manchu
there were others too that i regret we
did not get into in this series
the eastern turkistan republic i just
mentioned them was established in
november
1933 in kashgar and emirate and khotan
had also broken away and declared
independence in march of that year
their enemies were the han and the way
and just because they shared their
islamic faith didn't make these two
groups
bosom buddies they hated each other
there was plenty of bad blood to point
to between them going back to the ching
that
kept the animosity burning when the
eastern turkistan republic was first
declared
the leaders immediately sought out
diplomatic recognition
they had no money which already put the
whole movement behind the eight ball
like the zungars of the last century
they reached out to
all neighbors and imperialists willing
to hear them out
but no one was too hot to support them
one little amusing related sidebar i
wanted to quickly mention was bertram
sheldrake
he was a london brit who converted to
islam and his teens and became a
huge huge proponent to introducing the
religion
and lifestyle all around england it was
a major guy in that community
this was in the 1920s and 30s after
hosting an etr delegation at his london
residence in 1933
later on during a speaking tour in
beijing in the summer of that year
at the grand hotel de wagon lee some
official looking group
from kashgar called on sheldrick and
offered him the kingship
of their new land which they said was
called islamistan
and while all this was happening in
broad daylight sheldrake
unbeknownst to him was being spied upon
by kmt agents who were worried about
what this
whole strange thing was all about and
what were these etr people up to with
this englishman
sheldrake ended up taking them up on
their offer and
began being touted around the region as
his majesty
king khalid of islamistan he had already
long been known as khalid sheldrake
you know sheldrick's family they had
made it big in the pickles
sauces and chutney's business so the
press
had a field day goofing on his jump from
the air to a pickle fortune to the
king of this exotic desert kingdom
you think the press is brutal today
anyway
his entourage started to make its way to
kashgar for this
big coronation ceremony and the whole
matter was entirely
enveloped in controversy and all kinds
of diplomatic pressure was
heaped on the east turkestan republic
higher ups about this
whole zany notion and the etr was
already
wrought with factions that bitterly
opposed each other
and of course the soviets gave this
whole crazy idea
a big meaty thumbs down
what had just happened with japan and
emperor puyi being made the figurehead
of manchu
was still fresh in their mind and the
soviets told everyone who would listen
that's what the brits had up their
sleeve and xinjiang with this uh
king khalid and you wait and see this
brit was going to end up being the puyi
of xinjiang
well by the time sheldrake got close to
xinjiang the whole etr
was already on its way out the hue
muslim general
ma chong ying after getting beaten in
urumqi
had headed south and got to be the one
chiefly responsible for
tearing down this first eastern
turkistan republic
and king khalid of islamistan became the
only xinjiang king to never step foot
there
and soon after putting an end to the etr
ma chong ying took off for the soviet
union or was taken there we don't know
for sure
but he was never seen again and that was
the last we ever hear from him
the eastern turkistan republic never
really
got off the ground but as these kinds of
events in world history often do
they define a mission or crystallize the
essence of a widely shared political
consciousness
when the second east turkestan republic
gets off the ground
this first incarnation will have already
sowed the seeds for its creation
well if you enjoyed freedom xinjiang
under
shirt's eye wasn't the place for you
maximum repression was carried out
against dissenters
chief among them uyghurs and hui
the anti-muslim measures didn't
discriminate between the two
reformers and intellectuals felt it the
most
purges carried out by shangshit's eye
under the watchful eye of his soviet
backers and advisers
led to the deaths of thousands and even
tens of thousands of xinjiang locals
with a focus on intellectuals
into the 1940s deep into world war
ii after shangshit's eye saw the ussr
in dire straits following hitler's
onslaught and
operation barbarossa well he
miscalculated
and believed hitler was going to put the
soviet union away in this campaign
so shung shirts high decided to unhitch
his wagon from the ussr
switch sides and try his luck with
chiang kai-shek's government
in chongqing and to shojiang that he was
on team kmt
he carried out a bloody purge of all
soviets and
communists in xinjiang and one of the
communist cadres
caught up in shang shirt's high's net
was malta mean
younger brother to mao zedong he was
executed on
september 27 1943 in happier times
shank shirts hyatt reached out to the
ccp
then cooling their heels in yen on after
the long march
shang had asked for some assistance and
support
mao zedong sent his younger brother to
mean
and other cadres to xinjiang with
instructions to work with the leadership
there
but again after 1942 when chung shirt's
eyes split with the soviets any chinese
communists caught in his net
didn't fare well but then after
stalingrad
and russia's incredible come-from-behind
victory over the nazis
well shung shirts i realized he should
have kept his chips on stalin
so he figured he'd better try and do
some damage repair and get back in the
soviet union's good graces
so he went and gave chiang kai-shek the
boot and ran
back to the soviets who had always
served him so well
and the letter he sent to stalin sort of
but not quite begging him to take him
back
well uncle joe forwarded it to jiang and
stalin told shang
go take a hike and so without allies
either in china
or the ussr his star fell very fast
shang shirts hai who did so much to
nurture an environment where
the soviets while the kmt government was
distracted with world war ii
were able to help themselves to
xinjiang's bountiful abundance
and agitate as needed well
he was finally kicked out of there by
1944.
well in the five-year countdown to the
communist victory in 1949
there were a few more figures who got to
write themselves into the history books
having the dubious honor to rule and
administer
xinjiang province at this point in 1944
all chiang kai-shek's kmt government was
trying to do was
to keep xinjiang out of ccp hands
chiang's next man in urumqi was
remembered mostly for the velocity of
expulsions of soviets from the province
and his complete
bungling of the kmt takeover and the
economic disaster that ensued
he got yanked out of there in march of
but in the late fall of 1944 with little
help from soviet agents provocateur
rebellions broke out in the ili valley
again
northwest xinjiang border with
kazakhstan then
part of the soviet union and this elie
rebellion as it became known
culminated in the declaration of the
second east turkestan republic on
november 15
1944. unlike the first etr based in
kashgar
the 1944-1949 east
turkestan republic was based in the
zungarian portion of xinjiang
up in the north the second east
turkestan republic
another name it went by was the turkish
islamic republic of east turkestan
this was all a soviet-led operation
they saw all the unrest and frustrations
of the turkic locals there and just
went in and exploited it jiang had to
send the kmt stalwart
mapufang to xinjiang to push back
against the soviets who
well to put it on a simple level wanted
to return xinjiang back to the glory
days under their puppet
shang shirts high mapufang
he was the brother of mapuching and the
son
of machi he was also a cousin to mah
hongwei
in mahongpin all major
warlord figures in china's northwest and
kmt allies
they hated communists they were known in
history by many names
usually the ma clique and their history
mostly all took place in northwest china
they were early allies of yongsan shin
and those two work together and stamping
out all the
random brush fires surrounding all the
rims of the
basins of xinjiang these battles between
the soviet-backed etr rebels and
mabufang's kmt-backed army were
destructive in so many ways it was a
series of
massacres and revenge attacks committed
by both sides
how many of these kinds of battles
haunted xinjiang's history going back to
the
silk road we'll never know by september
1945 however
the etr was in control of most of
northern xinjiang
and into this new state of affairs came
the next man in urumqi
sent by china to bring order to that
place this one turned out to be
the best leader of them all but when
you're fighting a losing battle
it's hard to come out a winner this was
the respected
zhang zhu zhong this guy was as clean as
they came
incorruptible a solid official and
military man loaded with bonafides once
he got out there his mission was to
negotiate with this elite government
that was spread out over
three districts in northern xinjiang for
this reason
this period between 1944 to 1949 is also
known
as the three districts rebellion ely
rebellion
or just the plain old east turkestan
republic
all produced and directed by the soviet
union
i think they got an executive producer's
credit on that too
hey the soviets had a huge stake in all
this because of their own
turkic citizens on their side of the
border
if there was going to be unrest they
wanted to keep it on the xinjiang
side when chang jong arrived in xinjiang
the etr
taking stock of their situation and was
fishing for some kind of role in a
coalition government they were open to
dropping the
republic off their etr name and agreeing
to a certain amount of autonomy
and being able to call themselves
eastern turkistan
then in august of 1945 the ussr
and china government signed a treaty of
friendship and alliance
and one of the things stalin promised
was not to interfere in what china had
going on in xinjiang
so all that confidence they had with the
ussr standing behind them
the east turkestan republic took a big
hit
chang in his capacity as chairman of the
new xinjiang provisional government and
commander-in-chief of the xinjiang
military
was admired by all sides and had a style
that was
able to bring disparate factions
together he kept uyghur advisors close
to him and
ran his office in a very diverse and
progressive manner
he had said and i'm quoting from james
millward again
quote we chinese comprise only five
percent of the population of xinjiang
why have we not turned over political
power to the uyghurs and other racial
groups
who constitute the other 95 percent end
quote
not many others in the kmt were as
progressive as chang
chung on this matter it had to be winner
take all in xinjiang and none of this
respect for self-determination stuff
would be considered
and despite putting everything down on
paper that in
theory looked fair and balanced well
not everyone was happy with it despite
appearing to act in good
faith to build this coalition government
the elite government in these three
districts
they couldn't take that final step to
break with their dreams of an
independent east turkestan republic
and in the end that's what they ended up
doing they broke away
and acted in a de facto independent way
even issuing their own currency
the kmt didn't approve of zhang
jiejung's efforts or the deal he made
they went far beyond their bottom line
and it probably won't surprise you to
know
the uyghurs didn't think chang chung had
gone far enough
and almost as soon as the agreement had
been signed well both sides were
amending it as they saw
fit into 1947 there were
constant protests and chang
did all he could to bring the sides
together but he was getting nowhere
there were too many sides and interests
involved with everyone
solely looking out for themselves turkic
groups who
tied their fate to the soviets and those
who cooperated with the kmt
then there were the kmt officials and
operatives in xinjiang
and lastly the soviets the master
manipulators who played their hand
well and continued to thrive in xinjiang
a place they knew much better than their
kmt frenemies
and by the summer of 1947 with the
chinese civil war going full
bore everything chang worked to put
together
fell apart the east turkestan republic
and these three districts went its own
way and immediately went to work to
start building their new nation from the
ground up
the kmt regime based in urumqi was in
shambles and exercised no true power
or authority after zhang threw up his
hands and left
the kmt's next representative in urumqi
was masud sabri
an anti-soviet uyghur intellectual and
nationalist with
kmt ties he lasted until january 1949
when he was replaced by one of the
darlings of the kmt
berhan shahidi as for zhang jiejong
he ended up defecting to the communists
and berhan shahidi's caretaker
government
were the ones on duty when the people's
liberation army under panda hawaii came
knocking
chang chong led the negotiations between
the kmt government led by berhan shahidi
and the communist representatives a
peaceful surrender was carried out and
the
eighty thousand nationalist troops in
xinjiang
put down their arms in mid-october wong
chun
led the pla's takeover of the remaining
seven districts of xinjiang
and over time the north and south of
xinjiang were united
and wang jun wrote himself into modern
xinjiang history as another one of the
more brutal and
hated chinese to operate out of there
during his time in charge
not a popular figure amongst the uyghurs
of xinjiang
and i just also wanted to mention
quickly the united states had a spy
operating in xinjiang all this time
carrying out covert surveillance
operations on the soviets
atomic program and nuclear bomb testing
this man douglas mccarron was operating
in xinjiang around this time
under the cover of you know being a vice
consul
anyway he was killed in 1950 and became
the first
cia officer ever to lose his life in the
line of duty
and douglas mccarran and became the
first star
on the cia's wall of honor at langley
so there it is from the taran mummies to
the east turkestan republic surrender to
the people's liberation army in 1949
a mere 4 500 years or so
my intention was only to take this up to
1911 but after having second thoughts i
decided to just
bring the main events up to 1949.
you know xinjiang's been in the news a
lot these past few years
not for good reasons either all the
repression
the camps and all the stories of uyghurs
caught up in this
historic nightmare and countries who
naturally would support them in their
struggle looking the other way so as not
to
offend china's leadership the purpose of
this series was to try and offer you
some background understanding of
xinjiang
you know i joke about viewing everything
from 130 000 feet up in the sky
but that's really what this was any
serious scholars of central asia might
view these 12 episodes as a brief
comic book version of the history barely
scratching the surface of the surface
and exploring the land and the diversity
of the people
and the histories and cultures
when researching this subject of
xinjiang that combines the histories of
so
many other lands well i've been
overwhelmed with how much there is to
know
i've been yammering on and on for 12
episodes over six
hours about the history of xinjiang
and all along i kept thinking to myself
god just to
just to explore the history of khotan or
kashgar or turpan
just the goings-on that happened over
the millennia in those individual places
alone could be a
12-part series i tried to just stick to
the main road but
as far as all the other things there are
to know about xinjiang
well i hope this little overview wetted
your appetite and maybe you'll
explore a little a little more on your
own and when you hear about xinjiang in
the news in the coming months and years
i hope this series was able to help you
put a little historical context behind
what you're hearing and reading
like it is with almost every inhabited
place on earth
that wasn't always like what you see
today there was a whole
long historical road that led
everything to where it is today okay
i don't know about all of you but i'm
ready for a new topic i hope you found
this series to your liking
if you want to learn more i suggest you
start
with james a millwood's eurasian
crossroads
a history of xinjiang i wouldn't steer
you wrong
you know i'm not the most social media
savvy guy in the history podcasting
space
so i hope you'll all spread the word
around to your friends
family wechat groups and whatnot about
the chp
and a big thanks to all of you who have
been doing that already
okay laszlo montgomery signing off from
the city of los angeles in the state of
confusion it's
baking hot here but not as hot as it is
in terpon
xinjiang i just checked it's 110 there
that's 110 american degrees baby
take care everyone and please think
about carving out half an
hour in two weeks time for another
exciting episode
of the china history podcast